Mr. Vice President, welcome back
>> [music]
>> to interesting times.
>> Thank you. Thanks for having me.
>> [music]
>> It's great to have you. So, we have a
really high bar for repeat [music]
guests on this show. I know that you've
been doing a lot of media, right? So,
it's probably feels pretty pretty easy.
But here, the standard is one, the
repeat guest has to be second in line,
first in line for the presidency,
>> Okay, first in line.
>> in line you're first in line, right?
Um
they need to have recently published a
book on themes important to this show,
and they also need to have recently
concluded a peace deal with the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
>> [laughter]
>> So, congratulations
for clearing the bar.
>> Thank you. I've checked all three boxes.
>> You've checked you've hit the trifecta.
Uh so, we're going to talk about the
book. We're going to talk about
Christianity and your personal journey,
>> Sure.
>> and sort of how religion and politics
fit together in America. Small topics,
um
but we're going to start with a few
questions about the Iran deal.
>> Okay.
>> And just to locate things for viewers,
we're in a moment where uh we have the
deal.
>> Correct.
>> The actual thing has not yet been
released. It may appear between the time
we have this conversation and the time
it's published, but that doesn't matter
cuz I have you here and you can tell me
what's in it. So, let's start with the
most basic question. What is in this
deal
that is good for America and good for
the world that we couldn't have gotten
without 3 months of military conflict?
>> Okay. So, first of all, we actually
really want to get this out because it's
hard to have the conversation without
the full text. And you know, I think
part of the the misalignment here is
that in the Pakistanian Qatari systems,
they don't quite have the First
Amendment and freedom of the press, and
so there isn't this sort of expectation
that the text is going to be out there
for the American people
uh to to to to to actually interrogate
and look at and analyze and understand
for themselves, but it will be out and
we're having this conversation,
obviously, on Wednesday morning.
Um here's what the deal does, and the
first thing is that it opens the Straits
of Hormuz, which obviously has been a
major source of global supply shock in
in both oil and gas, but also oil and
gas derivative products like fertilizers
and so forth. So, the Straits of Hormuz
are open immediately. I will say, break
a little bit of news for you this
morning, Ross. I don't think this has
been said yet. Last night was the first
night in over 100 days of conflict where
the Iranians were not shooting at
commercial traffic in the Straits of
Hormuz. And so, you know, we've been
able to get a fair amount of oil and gas
out over the last few weeks, but that
has been under the protective blanket of
the American military. The Iranians
formally stopped shooting yesterday, and
so that's a major milestone. And and
that's one of the reasons why oil and
gas is so low. That's number one.
>> Can I pause? Were you concerned that
there's a lot of complex elements inside
the Iranian regime?
>> [snorts]
>> Were you concerned about a world where
last night the policy of the Iranian
government would be no shooting at ships
in the Strait of Hormuz, but someone
would be shooting anyway?
>> Well, one of the confusions here is
within the Iranian system there's this
question of like when does the deal
become official? Is it when it's
announced at this formal ceremony on
Friday? Is it when it was signed
digitally by the president of the United
States? There's like been some internal
debate there. There's also fundamentally
a communications problem. So, uh to be
clear and to be charitable, it was
there's a little bit of like an Andrew
Jackson in New Orleans after the war of
war of 1812 has already had a peace
treaty signed where there are people in
their system who are not even aware that
the peace deal had been signed. And so,
a lot of complicated things going on in
that system. What I would say is that
while there are fractures, and those
fractures were very powerful a couple of
months ago, we do see some coalescing
with both the hardliners and the
pragmatists behind the idea not just
that they want a peace deal now, but
that 47 years of Iran policy towards the
United States has been a mistake. And
when you ask like what has changed, I
think that has changed. And so, what the
deal does is in some ways like there are
there are very significant wins in the
MOU itself, but the big wins are are
fundamentally conditional. Conditional
on whether the Iranians actually
transform the way that they behave
vis-a-vis the region.
So, what it says, Straits of Hormuz are
open, the Iranians will destroy the
highly enriched uranium stockpile that
they have, which people always ask me,
"What's different about this versus the
JCPOA?" And there are all these answers
I can give.
>> That is just [clears throat] to clarify,
that is the deal that the Obama
administration made.
>> Correct. That's the That's the Obama
Iran nuclear deal. And the the the Iran
the Obama Iran deal allowed them to
generate a stockpile of enriched
uranium. Our deal ensures that that
stockpile is destroyed and eliminated.
So, that's like a very very big
difference, a very important difference
for the American people.
>> And is that Again, is that something
that has been the destruction
has actually been agreed to? That's not
something that will be negotiated over
>> Yeah. And and it And it And it sets a
minimum methodology for the destruction.
But when you say it negotiated over a
period of months, this is why I always
try to be clear about what this is and
what this isn't is. You know, this is
not a
a blood oath, right? People break
contracts. And my attitude is, you know,
I can be cynical at sometimes about what
people promise. Yeah,
that's right.
>> [laughter]
>> You're in the one business maybe where
people people break break their word
more than in politics. But regardless,
when people say,
you know,
is the destruction actually in the
memorandum of understanding? The answer
is yes, but it's not like we signed this
thing on Friday and through some act of
magic it happens. There has to be a
process for doing it. We have to see
that it's actually happening. And so,
while the memorandum of understanding,
while the peace deal is I think
fundamentally good for the American
people, a big part of this is verifying
and showing they they they honor their
end of the commitment. And then of
course, and this is the final point, and
then I'm sure you have some follow-up
questions, but there's a lot in the
media about all of the things Iran gets,
right? I've heard numbers $300 billion
reconstruction fund, $24 billion
of unfrozen assets, and and all this
other stuff. And you know, what what the
deal contemplates is that there will be
economic benefits, to be clear, not paid
for by American taxpayers, not a cent of
American money goes to Iran, but that
there could potentially be economic
benefits for Iran uh paid for by
investment from other countries, but
only if they fundamentally transform
their country. And so, when I see people
say, "Well, you know, you shouldn't give
them anything." I say, "Well, we're not
giving them anything." And then they'll
say, "Well, you shouldn't allow anybody
to invest in their country." And I say,
"Well, if the Iranian political system
is transformed and how they interact
with the United States of America, isn't
investing in their reconstruction and
redevelopment a good thing?"
Like if we transform their country,
isn't that good?
>> Is the Iranian political system going to
be transformed by this deal? Like
internal politics?
>> Well, the the the Iranian political
system is not going to be transformed by
this deal, but I think the Iranian
political system has been transformed by
what has happened not just over the last
few months, but over the last year and a
half. I mean, one of the frustrations,
Ross, that I had in just the the lead-up
to
Operation Epic Fury, which is the the
operation that has gone on the last few
months, but really, you know, I've been
in this job for a year and a half. I've
been involved in these negotiations from
the very beginning is how sclerotic and
impossible it was to actually talk to
the Iranians. Like a fundamental
question, what is it that you want,
Iran? What is it that you care about?
What is it that you're willing to give
up? That conversation was quite
literally impossible 6 months or so ago.
Like I would talk to friends of mine who
are very dovish, who really didn't want
to do anything militarily in Iran. And I
would say to them, I understand your
perspective, of course. Like I I try to
understand where everybody's coming
from. And as you know, like I'm I'm
generally speaking very skeptical of
open-ended military engagements. I think
this was different because it actually
had a clear goal and a clear end point
in in in mind. But I would say the the
fundamental problem is Donald Trump
could strike a deal with the Iranians,
but it would require the Iranians to
actually negotiate like a normal
country. The fundamental difference is
they are negotiating like a normal
country. They're making demands. Now, of
course, sometimes we don't like these
demands, we disagree with those demands,
but they're talking to us in a way that
I don't think that has happened
diplomatically with the Iranian system
in a very long time, maybe ever.
>> So, I think the strongest version of the
critique that you're pushing back
against here would say something like
yes, the deal makes,
you know, it it links investment, the
unfreezing of assets, and everything
else
hopefully to some kind of uh settlement
of the nuclear program. But the Obama
administration also thought that they
had made breakthroughs in talking to and
negotiating with the Iranian regime. And
actually, what the Iranian regime will
do in this case is just what it has
always done, which is it will find ways
to pocket at least some money and then
set out to just slow walk whatever
system of inspections, destruction,
observation you guys try and set up,
right?
>> Yeah, so I understand that criticism,
but here's here's here's what I'd say
about this. There are a few massive
differences between the Obama Iran deal,
but not just the deal itself, but our
posture going into the deal. So, if you
compare where we were back when Obama
made that deal, number one, Iran had an
extraordinarily advanced nuclear
program, probably the most advanced
nuclear program that was not yet a
weapons-grade program.
Number two, their economy was at a
position of maximal strength compared to
years of dealing with Iran. And number
three, their conventional military was
at its position of maximal strength
relative to the region, okay? So, what
we were effectively doing with the Obama
deal, I know that people will say I'm
being uncharitable to the Obama deal.
Forgive a Republican vice president for
being uncharitable to Obama, but we were
basically taking the Iranians at a
position of maximum strength, and we
were bribing them to do a little bit
less on the nuclear side. What we're
doing here is we're taking the Iranians
at a position of maximum weakness and
cutting off their ability to rebuild to
get back to the place that they were
when Obama cut the JCPOA. Their
conventional military is largely
destroyed. Their nuclear program is
destroyed. I mean, they have no capacity
right now to enrich uranium, to
stockpile uranium. The facilities that
they built have now been buried under
rubble. It would take them
>> How long?
>> months even to dig that out.
>> How long just independent of the deal
itself,
what is your administration's estimate
of how long it would take Iran to
reconstitute things based on what's been
done to them in the last two years?
>> It's a very hard question to answer, and
obviously it gets a little bit into
classified information, but you know,
it's it's it's dependent a little bit
also on how much money they have to
build an underground nuclear facility
with all of the centrifuges and all the
capacity to enrich uranium and all the
ability to turn enriched uranium into a
nuclear weapon, it would cost a lot of
money. And so, without access to money,
many, [clears throat] many years,
decades possibly. If they had unlimited
access to resources, but they don't, it
would obviously be shorter. But, we feel
like like with extraordinary confidence,
if they did everything that they could
to build a nuclear weapon, they couldn't
do it during this administration. And
what this deal does fundamentally is set
up a framework whereby we can be
confident that they're not going to
build a nuclear weapon far into the
future. But, you asked about the the the
Obama nuclear deal and I I want to make
two other very important points about
this.
The other very significant difference,
and I I I'm going to repeat this, but
there was already a stockpile of
enriched material. The Obama deal
allowed them to further stockpile
enriched material. Our deal takes the
existing stockpile and ensures that it's
destroyed. And this is the third I
actually think this is the most
important. I trust the people who know
the most and who have the strongest
incentives to care. Who are the people
who know the most about Iran and care
the most about Iran? It's the Gulf Coast
Coalition. Okay, it's Saudi Arabia, it's
Qatar, it's the UAE, Bahrain, Kuwait,
and so forth. What did they say about
the Obama JCPOA? Like, don't don't
believe the the Vice President if you if
you're not aligned with me politically.
What did the Arab regimes, the Arab
countries say about the Obama JCPOA?
They hated it. They thought that it was
effectively bribing Iran to try to be a
little bit less malign of an influence.
What are all of them saying about this
deal? That it's amazing. That it's the
first real sense that they've seen, and
these people have been dealing with Iran
in their own backyard. You know, Qatar,
you look at it on a map and it's like
you could practically swim to Iran from
Qatar, right? That's right in their
neighborhood. They're saying, all of
these countries, the Emiratis, the
Saudis, all these countries have been
great, by the way. They're all saying,
you know what? This actually is the
first time in 47 years that we think
something has transformed about Iran.
We're going to verify that, and of
course, if they don't transform, they
don't get any of the economic benefits
of the bargain, but there's an optimism
in the region about this deal that makes
me think people just have to listen to
what the experts in the region are
saying. They're very happy about it.
>> All right, two follow-ups off that.
>> Okay.
>> One reason
the Gulf states might be enthusiastic
about a peace deal right now relative to
the Obama era is that for all of the
weaknesses that you've described in the
Iranian system, Iran has also in this
conflict seemingly discovered the power
that comes with being able to close the
Strait of Hormuz and disrupt global
energy markets. So, someone might say,
well, sure, the Saudis and the Emirates
want to make this deal now because they
know that we're heading over a global
energy cliff that will screw them over
in various ways, and so they're willing
to talk themselves into a deal that they
wouldn't have liked as much if Iran
hadn't demonstrated that kind of power.
Isn't Isn't Iran at the very least
walking away from this war having
established
a kind of non-nuclear deterrent?
>> So, that was a a better but still wrong
argument I think 4 weeks ago. I think
it's very hard to sort of make that case
today. Let me Let me explain why.
>> [snorts]
>> So, number one is everybody knew the
Straits of Hormuz just for pure function
of geography and how easy it is to
asymmetrically disrupt traffic in the
Strait of Hormuz. Everybody, the Gulf
Coast Coalition, the United States,
Israel, Iran, everybody has known that
Iran has had that as a potential
leverage point to use.
Everybody understood that. So, the idea
that we sort of discovered that or that
the Gulf Coast Coalition discovered
that, I think that's that's that's not
accurate. Number two,
one of the things that we've we've
actually been able to do under a sort of
you know what was originally called
project freedom is that we've been able
to get a lot of oil and gas out of the
Gulf in the last few weeks. And I do
think this is one of the things the
Iranians learned is you know the Strait
of Hormuz is not a card that you play
and then you pick up off the table. You
have to play it day after day after day.
And I think the fundamental
transformation is that as the Iranians
saw that that leverage point I'm not to
be clear it was very powerful 3 months
ago. It was weakening more and more over
time. And so
they actually
>> you have kept going?
Without cuz cuz you did we we avoided
the scale of global energy shock, right?
That a lot of people myself included as
an amateur reader of you know people
writing about oil expected. We had
higher gas prices, but we didn't have
things were not nearly as bad as they
could have been. But my perception was
and a lot of people's perception was
that you couldn't keep running that
through the fall.
>> So by the way I have to give credit to
Scott Besent the Treasury Secretary and
Chris Wright the Energy Secretary
because part of the reason why the
doomsayer predictions about the oil and
gas markets and to be clear like I know
the American people have felt some pain
because of this. I don't want to
discount this, but the very worst
predictions never came to fruition
because Scott Besent and Chris Wright
did an amazing job at trying to absorb
as much of that shock as possible. So
could we have kept going? Sure we could
have kept going and we would have gotten
more and more oil and gas out of the
Strait of Hormuz, but the fundamental
thing that the president asks and this
is this is what he's just fundamentally
pragmatic about foreign policy is he
looks at the situation and says if we
keep going gas prices stay higher for
longer inevitably and we also don't get
this opportunity that we have right in
front of us to at least take a shot at
transforming the Middle East. And if it
doesn't work we can always figure out
new options a couple months down the
road. We can always just say, "By the
way, you know what? Their nuclear
program's destroyed. They can't rebuild
it without any money. So, we're going to
continue to choke their economy and
basically say to the Iranians, 'Come to
us when you want to make a deal.'"
There's a lot of optionality here. And I
think what the president said is he
wanted to get us to a point where we had
optionality, we had leverage, and then
play this out a little bit further. And
that's what we're doing.
>> Okay.
There is another country in the Middle
East
that
thinks of itself as having a very
intimate knowledge of the Iranian
regime.
>> Yeah.
>> Um not just the Gulf states. That's
Israel.
I don't think this deal is popular in
Israel right now. I don't think you're
an especially popular figure in Israel
today. We'll see where things are in 6
months. And one
perception, I think, that people have
after watching this war unfold is that
there is a certain misalignment, maybe,
between the kind of pragmatic American
interest that you just described the
president having and the more
existential sense of the stakes that
Israel has. And one key criticism of the
Obama deal
uh from people in the Republican Party,
people in Israel, elsewhere was always
that it was focused on the nuclear
program and wasn't focused on Iranian
proxies, their support for terrorism
around the Middle East, their support
for Hezbollah and Hamas. So, I'm just
curious,
do you think there's a misalignment
between the US and Israel? Do you think
Israel has incentives to
not want this deal to continue? And is
there a vision for how you get to a
point where Iranian support for
Hezbollah isn't sending rockets into
Israel on the regular?
>> Well, what what I'd say here is that
it's clear that large segments of the
Israeli political system and population
are very sensitive about this deal. But
I also think they're picking up on some
misinformation about the deal and
running with it and sort of panicking
about it. And I I fundamentally believe
this deal will be good for the entire
region and for the world. That includes,
of course, the Israelis. Now, I think
it's important to say that while I do
believe that, I do believe that this
deal will be good for the entire world,
fundamentally, we're worried about
what's in the best interest of the
American people. And to the extent that
and I think the president has shown this
where he sees misalignment between the
goals of the political system in Israel
and the goals of the American people,
he's willing to say that we're going to
pursue America's interests where there
are divergences. So, there are certainly
going to be disagreements from time to
time. I think that's normal. I will say,
I don't I don't know, maybe I've missed
this. I don't think Bibi himself has
actually criticized the deal because I
think he's maybe a little bit more
familiar with the details of what's in
it. But, yeah, you've seen people in
their system, Ben-Gvir and Smotrich, who
have attacked the deal. And I guess my
response to them would be,
what is your exact proposal?
And, you know, you're you're a country
of of 9 million people. You can't just
kill your way out of solving every
single national security problem that
you have. Look at what we've
accomplished. First of all, Americans
have protected a lot of Israeli lives
through our missile systems and through
our missile programs over the last few
months. We have destroyed their nuclear
program. We have got the Iranians in a
point where they're offering things.
Again, whether they'll actually act on
them, we'll see, but they're offering
things that would have been the stuff of
dreams even 6 months ago. So, let us
play this negotiation out. Let us see if
the Iranian actions actually meet the
Iranian words and give a little bit of
credit to the United States of America,
which I think has been an incredible
partner for the Israeli government for a
long time.
>> In the best case, do you think that this
deal changes how Hezbollah works?
>> Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. I mean,
I I I think that they
there is this this weird panic almost in
the Israeli system that I've picked up
on where they assume that everything
that is contemplated that is good for
Iran will happen but that will happen
without the Iranians changing any
behavior and I just don't know why
anybody would think that's true. That's
not how the deal is written. The United
States has all the financial leverage.
Like the president of the United States
or the Secretary of the Treasury have to
release all these sanctions. Do they
actually think we're going to release
sanctions on the Iranian, you know,
system if they're still funding a
terrorist organization? The answer is of
course not. So I I I I I find this whole
freak out in Israel a little bit odd
because I think that it comes from a
place of mistrust and I think that
America has earned the trust of that
region of the world. We've done a very
good job by that particular country and
that particular government and I I think
that the idea that we've made a terrible
deal is not supported by the facts but
just doesn't make any sense if you
consider the broad length of the
relationship.
>> Okay. We're going to try and come back
to this at the end. But you know who
only makes good deals?
>> [laughter]
>> Jesus.
Um so we're going to talk we're going to
talk
>> I was going to say, you know who also
had strong opinions
>> a lot from Israel?
>> Who came from who had strong views
>> in the Middle East. Yes.
>> [laughter]
>> So
in addition to talking about the Iran
deal, you're talking about your new book
which is called Communion, Finding My
Way Back to Faith.
>> Sure.
>> And it's part religious memoir and then
I would say
partially sort of folding religious
memoir into the kind of book that
someone contemplating a run for
president might might write. Sort of an
an uneasy hybrid maybe of genres.
Uh but you know, it's it's
a rich it's a rich text. Let's say that.
So let's The two
>> books that I've written are actually
fundamentally like uneasy fusions of
genres.
>> I mean, look,
I've I've done uneasy genre fusion
fusion myself.
>> So, all right. So, let's let's So, let's
talk about the personal story in the
book for a minute. You grew up, I'd say,
bouncing around different forms of
Protestant Christianity.
>> Correct.
>> Evangelical, non-denominational,
Pentecostal. All of which, I should
note, tend to be massively
underrepresented in the American elite.
>> Sure.
>> So, could you just talk about what
that
upbringing sort of offered to you? What
What did you take away from the
experience of religion, from growing up
in that part of American Christianity?
>> Yeah, so so, you know, some some good
and some not so good. I mean, I think in
in particular,
what was not so good about my religious
upbringing is it was fundamentally like
institutionally
unrooted.
We would occasionally go to church.
There was a church that my grandma liked
a lot, but, you know, in a good year, we
went there once a month right at most.
And so, one of the things that is true,
I think, of of of a lot of Christianity
in the United States of America, is
that, you know, people believe very
deeply. We certainly believed very
deeply, but I didn't have a proper
formation of my faith because I didn't
actually have a community of believers
that was surrounding me. When my grandma
died, that was sort of my anchor to
Christianity, and it's really no
coincidence that my grandma died and
like 2 years later I called myself an
atheist cuz that was the only real hook
that I had for my religious faith.
You know, one of the the really powerful
good things about American sort of
Protestant Christianity, especially in
the heartland, but I think probably true
anywhere. I think it's true of the black
church. It's It's It's true of a lot of
churches that I have, you know, much
less exposure to, but like there is a
generosity of spirit that I I really
think that you know in all of these
misunderstandings between coastal elites
in the heartland
if the average New York Times reader
showed up in a Pentecostal church in
Eastern Kentucky, he would find people
who barely have enough money to like put
clothes on the backs of their children
who are so welcoming and so generous and
would say, "Come over to my house and
have breakfast and let's talk about
Jesus and everything else." So there is
in these churches a sense of community
that unfortunately I just didn't tap
into when I was a kid, but I think it's
still still very profound and very very
important. I think the second thing that
you see in these churches that I I I I
still struggle with, I think I struggled
with as a kid, but is there's this idea
that you should have a a personal
relationship with Jesus Christ. The idea
that prayer was not just something you
sort of maybe you say some silent words
in your head or out loud, but that you
really think about it and you really
feel it and you have this sort of
connection.
And I I I think that that's actually I
I've maybe this is wrong. I mean I'm not
a religious scholar, I'm not a
theologian.
But I actually think that one of the
interesting things about American
Catholicism is that it has picked some
of that up from American Evangelical
Christianity. This idea that your
relationship with God should be a little
bit more personal and yes, it should be
institutional. It's got to be rooted,
but it also has to be personal, too. And
so, you know, I sort of picked up all
these things. I mean,
the last thing I'd say is is that there
is a lot written about this connection
between American Protestant Christianity
and political conservatism.
And what's interesting is that you know,
I'm I'm 41 years old. I really didn't
see that when I was like 12, but I
certainly saw it by the time that I was
18 or 19. And so there was this this
sense in which, you know, you could be a
Democrat or a Republican if you were a
Pentecostal or a Southern Baptist and
maybe, you know, more people were
Republicans than Democrats in the
churches, but there was not this sense
of like political identification between
the Republican Party and between
conservative Christianity. I think the
country was sort of more integrated
politically somehow when I was a kid
versus when I was a teenager, but I I
think it's been very bad actually. And
in in one way in which I think it's been
bad for Christianity, I mean I talk
about this in in in the book. My my
stepmom very devout Christian, sort of
one of the very first people by the way
to sort of be truly mega, truly on board
with with Donald J. Trump, but I I will
never forget this conversation I had
with her. We're getting ready for church
and and I'm like, you know, why are you
Republican? And she says, well,
Republicans are the party of rich
people. Like her, she was raised by a
union man and like a lot of us, we were
raised by union men who worked in union
blue collar jobs. She said, Republicans
are the party of the rich, but at least
they care about family and at least
they're trying to protect the life of
the unborn and that was why she was a
Republican. And it's interesting that I
I think the
there is a rich Christian pro-family,
protect the unborn sort of social
tradition that I think is really
important, right? And I do think that
you see it reflected in the Republican
Party more than the Democratic Party,
but there's also a Christian economic
tradition of trying to uplift the poor
and supporting your community and being
there for people who are really
struggling that I I think a lot of, you
know, the the sort of the business side
of the Republican Party doesn't pay
attention to that side of the Christian
tradition and I think that's a mistake
and it's bad frankly for both
Christians, but I also think it's bad
for the Republican Party.
>> When you lost your faith.
>> Yeah.
>> So,
in your early 20s, um
it was around when you were in the
Marines. And you you mentioned that sort
of sense of politics
as sense of politicization of faith
itself as one
factor, right? That you had the sense
that some of the churches you were
connected to were themselves talking
about culture war issues at a moment
when your family was suffering, dealing
with addiction, dealing with various
issues that seemed very remote from
culture war debate. So, just picking up
off that, just talk about how you became
a non-believer.
>> Yeah, so,
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> you know, this this is one man's story,
but I suspect in talking to people that
it's it's it's more common
um than than I might have realized, but
you know, if if you think about this
again, I was unchurched, so my
grandmother dies, I have no connection
to Christianity. And part of the reason
why I wrote this book is because as a
father, I think a lot about, you know, I
care a lot about this. I believe Jesus
Christ is the son of God. I take my kids
to church every single week, and I have
this fear, like I think a lot of
parents, that it just won't take. For
whatever reason, it won't take.
And so, why didn't it take for me? I
think one thing in particular, going
back to this sort of the politics,
so I'm 21 years old. I'm about to leave
for Iraq.
The Christianity that I've been exposed
to is very focused on culture war
topics. So, the Terri Schiavo case, I
write about this in the book, was a
very, very big story. And by the way, I
think the Terri Schiavo case does raise
some very difficult questions of like
morality and end-of-life care and all
and so forth, but
>> This was This was a woman who
there was a big debate about whether,
essentially, to take her off to remove
her to remove her feeding tube.
>> Yes. So, again, I'm not even saying the
Christians that I was I was I was sort
of mad at them that they were wrong on
the substance, but the fact that this
was such a focus of both the Protestants
and the Catholics in America at the
time,
what was going on for me? I was about to
leave for Iraq. My entire family was
terrified that I was you know, something
bad was going to happen to me. My mom
was struggling with the worst throes of
her addiction problem. My grandmother
had just died. Our economic situation in
our family had been bad for a long time.
Now it seemed to somehow get worse. And
I'm sending money back home to my family
and thinking to myself, this
Christianity has nothing to say about
the struggles of my life.
And in some ways I was being
uncharitable, but in some ways I think
it's important for Christian churches to
recognize that there are a lot of kids,
you know, whether they're at college,
they're in the workforce, they're living
the normal struggles of life. They're
dealing with heartbreak, they're dealing
with addiction in their family, they're
dealing with maybe they're struggling to
find a job. And I and I do think that as
Christians we have to ask ourselves
like, does the gospel speak to a
21-year-old kid who's struggling with
all the normal things that 21-year-old
kids struggle with? At least at my in my
life at the time, I didn't feel like it
was speaking to me.
>> Then from there you go into a stage of
your life where
you leave the Marines,
you're in college,
>> [snorts]
>> you're in your 20s,
>> Yeah.
>> you're reading Ayn Rand, you know, which
is sort of, you know, the the gospel of
hyper-individualism. And I was actually
struck by how
in a way old-fashioned
the arc that you follow is, where where
I think I feel like it was really
commonplace
to have a dynamic in American life where
people drift away from religion when
they're in the individualist phase of
their 20s, when they're dating,
drinking, you know, sinning, and so on,
right?
>> [laughter]
>> Um, and then to come back as they sort
of assume adult responsibilities. And
you're you're pretty straightforward
about this, like you have various sort
of brushstroke of providence moments,
but it seems like really you come back
to faith
because you want to be a good husband,
even though your wife, Usha, is not
herself a Christian, right? She looms
large as as as a factor.
>> Being a father, having kids, like these
were sort of the building blocks, I
think, of American religion for a long
time. And I'm I'm curious, you know, to
what extent do you think that religion
serves
to connect people to adult roles? And
how do you balance that in your own
mind, that sort of structural social
role of religion with the do I have a
personal relationship with Jesus
question?
>> I've always Look, one of my flaws as a
person, and I sort of realized this in
myself when I was in my 20s, is I I I
like fundamentally I I'd become a
striver. I was not like trying to
achieve something like, oh, I'm going to
I would I would have built rockets
because I think it's important for
mankind to go back to Mar- or to go back
to the moon or to go to Mars. I was just
like, I want to win the social
competition. I want to be better than
other people. And so, I wanted to go to
the best school, so I got into Yale Law
School, and I wanted the best jobs, and
I wanted to make the most money. But,
the thing that I sort of realized is
that this kind of striving had made me
pretty hollow. It had made me less
interesting than some of the Christians
that I know who seem to have things
figured out much better uh than the sort
of elites that I had surrounded myself
with.
And I I just started searching for
something that answered the more
important questions. Like, how do you be
a good father? How do you be a good
husband? So, one way that I would put
this is And this goes back to the
personal relationship thing is Yes, I do
think religion serves a socially useful
role. I think the evidence is quite
clear that people and families that are
raised with some sort of sort of
institutionalized faith are happier and
healthier and more well-adjusted. But, I
also think like isn't that evidence that
there's something about Christianity
that's particularly true? That if these
people who believe these things and
practice the faith in these ways,
you know, I I come back to this phrase,
I think it's from the book of Matthew,
by your fruits you shall know them. So,
if the fruits of Christian faith and
tradition are happier, healthier, more
well-adjusted, more virtuous people,
then maybe there's something true about
the faith. And that's true with all of
the fact that there are exceptions, that
there are terrible Christians in the
world, and there are very good and and
virtuous atheists in the world, but as a
general matter, I sort of started to
believe that Christianity bore the best
fruits.
And you know, there are all these you
know, everybody has their own sort of
personal story here. A big part of my
personal story is that I was really
fascinated by the fact that so many of
the the people in my life who seemed to
have things most figured out were
Christians. And a lot of them were
Catholics. So, they would take me to
Catholic church, and I'd start to feel a
little bit more comfortable there. And I
think it is possible to
over-intellectualize this stuff. At some
basic level, I had some really good
friends who are really good people, and
they sort of showed me the truth of
faith by the way that they conducted
themselves in the world.
>> Yeah, it's it's seems in the book like
at times
you're emphasizing
religious life and faith as an
alternative to
meritocratic striving, so empty
meritocratic striving. But then there's
also, and I think this is relevant to
conservative politics, right? And the
right-wing coalition, a sense in which
you're offering it
in a way as an alternative to a kind of
male nihilism, right? And
>> Sure.
>> you talk about when you're in your 20s,
right? That was the culture of, let's
say, pick up artists, and the game. But
now, I think you could say it's kind of
metastasized into a culture of, you
know, male influencers who have big
doses of misogyny, sometimes racism and
anti-Semitism, a whole spectrum from
Andrew Tate to Nick Fuentes, let's say.
What what is the best response to that
culture? Do you want to sort of
proselytize to young men in those worlds
about the path that you took?
>> No, I mean I've never thought of myself
as proselytizing to to really anybody. I
mean I just try to live the best life
that I can and if something is
>> Yeah, yeah, okay, but you've written
you've written a book. You've written a
book.
>> that's right.
>> That's that's offering models.
>> kind of put it out there in the world
and and and yeah, like I do think that
there is some some great virtue in the
life of the family and the life of
actually focusing on things that matter.
I think it creates, you know, just much
much better outcomes. But I also think
it's going to be better for your soul.
So I write a lot about Usha and a lot
about, for example, the fact that she
she is not a Christian and I felt kind
of guilty actually about returning to my
faith with all the demands that it, you
know, comes with. I mean like I think
about this every single Sunday when I
take my 36 weeks pregnant wife who is
herself not a Christian and
you know, us and our three kids and
they're late getting their shoes on and
they're always misbehaved and I think to
myself like she did not sign up for
this. She signed up to sleep in on
Sundays and not have to deal with this,
but she she does it with incredible
patience and that was her being not just
okay with that, but supportive of that
journey was like almost confirmation or
a sign that it was okay for me to go
down this pathway. But the thing about
like relationships, okay? And I think
you probably I think all millennials
experience this cuz we all grew up in
the same culture is there was like this
sense in which there was nothing sacred
about romance, right? Like some people
were more successful in dating world,
some people were less successful. Like
fundamentally this there there's nothing
sacred or profound about romance. It's
just you find somebody, maybe you care
enough about them to marry them, maybe
you have a guy who's just going from
from girl to girl week to week. But like
what what what
what I had this this sort of epiphany is
overstating it, but I realized is that
falling in love with Usha
made me realize that there was actually
something sacramental to love.
And that was a very critical sort of
observation. Like I thought the
Christian sacramental view of love was
at best old-fashioned, at worst
superstitious and kind of stupid when I
was 25 years old. But Usha, even though
she's not a Christian, she really like
changed how I thought about the union of
man and woman together. And she changed
how I thought about it without even
realizing it. I I thought about it in a
very, very Christian way.
>> You've just given some very eloquent
descriptions of how Christianity works
ideally in your own life.
How does [snorts] Christianity work in
the Trump administration? What is
Christian about the second Trump
administration?
>> [laughter]
[gasps]
>> Well, I mean, I I I think that
we have pursued a series of economic
policies.
I would say
you know, certainly the the tax policy
that if you if you look at it, the
distributional effects are much more
focused on the middle than they are on
the top compared to previous Republican
administrations. We've been attacked
mercilessly for a trade and economic
policy that is geared around rebuilding
middle-class jobs, whether they're in
the services sector, the manufacturing
sector, about rebuilding the middle
class in the United States of America. I
think if you go back, you know, it's
it's it's too early to say cuz we're
only a year and a half into it, but I
think the wage growth numbers in the
Trump administration suggest that we're
rebuilding the kind of dignity of
middle-class work and the wages that
come along with it.
>> growth before the Iran war started.
>> 100% there has there has been an
increase in inflation in the last few
months related to the conflict in Iran.
But fundamentally, if you get the wage
growth numbers right, even though you're
going to have shocks that exist in the
economy, if the wage growth is strong,
eventually that will produce better
outcomes for people. But, you know, I
also think we've we've pursued family
policy in a way that like, for example
the Wall Street Journal editorial page
the old guard of the business elite has
explicitly attacked us for. Why have you
increased the child tax credit? What
about the Trump accounts which actually
give people money so that their kids and
their families can build some wealth
over time.
There there are
you know for all of my frustrations with
my own party that it was too focused on
the business elites and not focused
enough on the actual people who made up
the Republican coalition. I think that
we've done a lot to make economic life
better for normal people and we've also
pursued I think the most pro-family
policy in pretty much my entire
lifetime.
>> We could have a longer argument about
the economics but I just want to
let's let's stipulate that
the Trump administration has in some way
a kind of vision of
rebuilding the working class that's
connected to Christianity.
>> Was that hard to say? Was that hard to
say Ross?
>> I'm stipulating
for the sake for the sake of argument
and the fact that that you have not
given us 3 hours to have this
discussion. We're stipulating it. It
also seems to me
like the administration has distanced
itself in different ways from some other
sort of
obvious expressions of Christian
influence on politics. Some of them more
sort of liberal coded, some of them more
conservative coded, right?
>> you mean?
>> Like the administration has been more
hostile than any prior Republican
administration to say nothing of
Democrats in the last 20 years to the
way we do humanitarian aid. It has kept
religious conservatives, pro-life
organizations especially
at arms length in a way that has led to
a lot of criticism. And then you know,
let's let's be honest, the tone
of the administration
is not consistently a Christian tone.
There is a tone of aggressive uncharity
to people who aren't on board with the
administration's policies. So, I would I
would describe those as three areas
where the administration has felt
functionally post-Christian to me, and
I'm curious what you think.
>> Well,
>> [sighs]
>> so so on on the the first point, um
well, sorry, the third point. I want to
address the first.
>> backward.
>> So, on the the tone thing, this is it's
it's very hard to rebut this because
it's like fundamentally unfalsifiable.
Because for every clip that you could
show me of me or the president or some
cabinet secretary saying something that
in your view is un-Christian, I could
show you another few clips of us doing
something or saying something that is
like very Christian. The nature of
political communication in the era of
mass media is that sometimes people are
going to say jokes that are taken out of
context. Sometimes people are going to
make mistakes. I'm not saying I I I make
mistakes. I I I talk about this in the
book a little. In my book, Communion,
available where books are sold, I talk
about the own mistakes that I've made as
a Christian leader
>> is an apology there is an apology to
childless cat ladies. And And we we
don't need to get sidetracked by that.
Go on.
>> But but you know, my point is like I'm
not saying we're perfect because we're
not. My point is that the tone argument
is in some ways, I think, people see
what they want to see.
And I also think that tonal arguments
are ways of frankly policing
working-class ways of communication and
covering them in elite preferences. Like
let me let me let me just take like a
classic example, right? So, the Biden
administration had a very humane way of
talking about immigration, about illegal
immigration. It was very charitable in
some of the words that it offered that
people to people who are coming into our
country. I would say that it was not
particularly charitable to the people
who were living with the consequences of
mass migration into our country. So at a
certain level, what I think matters much
more than perceived tone is actual
conduct. And I think on any issue, I
would argue, obviously I'm extremely
biased, I'm the vice president in this
administration, on any issue, while I'm
not saying we're perfect, I think that
our actual policy has been much better
from a perspective of like basic moral
practice. And I think that we've defied,
for example, the business elites of our
party
in a way that Joe Biden was never
willing to offend the cultural elites of
the far left in his administration. I
would say the same thing about the Obama
administration. But like just on on the
aid thing, okay?
So when we got in, one of the things
that we realized, and by the way, I I I
think there's
to put my like conspiracy tin foil hat
on, why is it that
conservative or at least centrist
parties keep winning landslide elections
in Latin America? It might have
something to do with the fact that your
tax dollars and my tax dollars went to
fund a left-wing NGO complex that
actually tilted Latin American elections
in favor of the far left parties. Now
maybe that was the policy preference of
the Biden administration, but those
things, those biases in the way that we
distributed international aid were so
built into the very bureaucratic
structure of those aid programs that we
got in and said, "We have to stop all of
this and rebuild it from scratch." So
even if you disagree with our policy
preferences, I would hope that every
American would agree the money that we
distribute to foreign countries should
be reflective of the political will of
the administration that was elected. So
if Joe Biden wants to fund left-wing
American parties, fine. I don't like it,
but the American people, that's
ultimately up to the decision of the
American people. If Barack Obama wants
to do that, it's the American people's
decision. But the fact that Donald Trump
became president, and we had this spigot
of money that was going to far-left
causes, required us to stop. The second
thing, and this is is again, because
this NGO complex, non-governmental
organization complex, had built up
around this money, what you saw in our
foreign aid program is remarkable
inefficiency. And so, Marco did a very
good job of this. He sort of sat down
and said, "You know what we're going to
do? We're going to stop this. We're
going to rebuild this from from the
ground up." We still distribute a lot of
money in foreign aid, but two
differences. It goes to the people who
actually need it, and not to
administrators. And number two, it goes
according to the policy preferences of
the elected president.
>> Okay.
I think that there was a
fundamental
carelessness in how the transition
you're describing was handled that had
real, and probably continues to have
real humanitarian costs.
But We have five but we have five
>> You're talking about PEPFAR there.
>> We're have We're talking about PEPFAR
and other programs associated with it.
But we have five minutes left, and I
have to I have to get us I'm going to
get us back to Iran by way of the
inevitable question about
the Pope.
>> Okay.
I mentioned that there were a couple
moments where you talk about brush
strokes of providence
moments, and
>> Is this the Is this the big reveal,
Ross?
>> to I'm going to read one of them, right?
You're talking about This is under Pope
Francis,
um
and you say, "At a hotel bar, I
questioned a conservative Catholic
writer about his criticism of the Pope.
My growing view, that's your view, is
that too many American Catholics have
failed to show proper deference to the
papacy, treating the Pope as a political
figure to be criticized or praised
according to their whims. While he
admitted, this is the conservative
Catholic writer, that some Catholics
went too far, he defended his more
measured approach when suddenly a wine
glass seemed to leap from a stable place
behind the bar and crash on the floor in
front of us. We both stared at each
other in silence for a bit, startled by
what we'd seen before ending our
conversation abruptly and excusing
ourselves. So yeah, so I was that
conservative Catholic writer.
>> Did I report this accurately?
>> you did you did report it accurately.
There was a mysterious leap of a glass.
And so I have to take the opportunity to
ask you after God warned us both against
it, how have you ended up as a Catholic
convert vice president fighting with the
Pope about the Iran war?
>> Because I'm not fighting with the Pope,
Ross.
>> Okay.
>> And if you look at what I said, this is,
you know, in public life you say things
and sometimes you make boneheaded
comments and sometimes you say things
that are to taken totally out of
context. What I said about the Pope is I
actually like that he offers his
opinions. I actually like that he's
speaking about the issues of the day and
that he's an advocate for peace, but
that doesn't mean that on prudential
questions of how to balance these
competing principles, you're always
going to have an elected administration
that is going to agree. I and I talk
about this in the context of immigration
policy and you know, I I what I what I
write in the book
>> Just Just just just just stick with
Iran.
>> Okay.
>> In the context of Iran.
>> Sure.
But [gasps] what
>> [sighs]
>> what I try to do is I try to accept like
you'll hear people say, well, you know,
you can just ignore this or that
clergyman or you can just ignore the
Pope. I've never taken that attitude.
What I say is the Pope is the leader of
the church. He is the thus the the
leader of the the institution that
preaches the gospel. He's an important
moral voice, but he also does have a
different role from the Vice President
of the United States. My role is for the
American people to try to apply moral
principles in ways that get the best
outcomes, that lead to the best things,
and that balance competing interests,
okay?
And his role, I think, is to preach the
gospel and to offer his opinions on how
he thinks we're doing.
And and fundamentally, that will in that
will inevitably lead to some conflict.
>> lead to some conflict, but but here is
the what I think is the irony,
right? Which is that
>> [snorts]
>> you were
arguing to some degree in a very polite
way, however you want to describe it,
with the Pope about what were his
critiques
of the Iran war, even if they were
couched in general terms.
But based on
one, the excellent reporting of the New
York Times, and two, basically
everything you've said and done in
public life,
we all know that you thought the Iran
war was a bad idea.
So, you were out there as the Catholic
Vice President trying to end a war that
you had opposed, while also trying to
defend
>> [snorts]
>> the administration against a Pope whose
critique I think you agreed with.
Is that a fair assessment of what was
going on?
>> No, I don't think it's I don't I don't I
do not think it's a fair assessment of
what's going on.
Well, because number one,
with all due respect to the fine
reporting of the New York of the New
York Times,
>> of the best.
>> things that are anonymously resourced or
anonymously sourced are always missing
important context. And my job as Vice
President United States, I have to do
sort of actually two things that are
pretty simple and straightforward, but
are complicated in the application.
Number one is I have to offer my
opinions the President of the United
States. I'm the only person in the
cabinet who can't be fired. So, I have
to tell the President of the United
States what I think.
>> is actually a really
interesting constitutional point that I
just wanted to take note of.
>> I have to tell the President of the
United States what I think about all
matters. I have to provide him the best
counsel. I have to make sure that he's
getting the best information. The
President, you know, is surrounded all
the time by a million different things,
and part of my job is to make sure that
he's provided good counsel both by me
and others. The second part of it is to
execute when the President makes a
decision. And so, when the President
makes a decision that we are going to
use this military campaign to get to a
point where we can end the Iranian
nuclear program, not just now, but for
the long term, I believe my job is to go
out there and support that and try to
make that policy decision as successful
as possible. I always find it
interesting. It's like even if I
granted, for the sake of argument, that
I believed this or that thing, it's like
what what what is it like do do do you
think that it would be moral or
appropriate to go out there and whine
publicly about a decision the President
of the United States had made? I'm not a
commentator. I'm the Vice President. I
serve in the administration. The
American people elected him to be in
charge of.
>> not saying that it's inappropriate. I'm
just commenting on
the strangeness of the position that you
ended up in because again,
you know, whatever whatever you want to
say publicly about it,
the world thinks, for good reason, that
you advised the President against the
war. The Pope was against the war, and
then you ended up in tension with the
Pope. Did you Did you talk to the Pope
at all in the last few months?
>> Um look, I I I I I have a lot of
admiration and respect for the Pope, as
you know.
I think, by the way, Pope Francis
>> You're not answering my question.
>> Well, because again, I think that uh
>> It's fine. That's fine.
>> That's fine. It's It's It's impor- Like
have I have I spoken to the Pope in the
last few months? Yes.
>> Okay.
>> Do I have what I would characterize, I
don't know what he would say, do I have
what I would characterize as a positive
relationship with the Pope? I I think
so.
But fundamentally,
we just have
>> like he did he feel like you were
secretly on his team?
>> I am not
>> Were you like, "Don't worry, I'm
secretly on team peace."
>> One thing I will not do with anybody
from the President of the United States,
the Pope, or anybody else, is I do not
talk about private conversations. If
somebody talks to me, I think they
should expect that I shouldn't go
blabbing to the media with all due
respect to my good friend and excellent
New York Times journalist Ross Douthat.
>> All all all all respect is appreciated.
So, all right, let's end then though
with
the role you're playing right now
because
whatever your views on the initial
wisdom of the war, you have been working
on a peace deal from very early
>> Sure.
>> in the conflict, right? And the
president, for reasons that I suspect
are related to your initial views on the
world on the war,
clearly gave you that job. And I had my
crack researchers look up situations
where a vice president was disassociated
with a peace deal. And you know, it's a
little unusual.
So, so you have you have an unusual
ownership of the deal, right?
Um,
do you expect that
>> a question? I thought it was just a
statement. It's a
>> statement. I guess the question is well,
one,
you've made jokes yourself and facts
come through jokes as we know, that the
president could, you know, host an
apprentice-style competition between you
and Marco Rubio to be his successor,
right? Is there a world where this peace
deal goes badly and [snorts] in a year
or so, the President of the United
States is like, "Yeah, we gave J.D. We
gave J. gave J.D. you chance to make
peace and he didn't, so I guess Marco's
star is rising. Is that Is that a
scenario that you think about?
>> I don't think about that at all.
>> Okay.
>> What I think about is this deal is good
for the American people. You're right, I
have worked very hard on it, but Marco's
been incredibly involved, the entire
team's been incredibly involved. You
know, one of the weirdest media
narratives that has developed is that
Marco and I are somehow this like
intense rivalry behind the scenes, when
he's like one of my favorite people that
I come to work with every day. And you
know,
>> I don't think you're in an intense in an
intense rivalry, but I will note that he
is the Secretary of State, and he is not
running point on this deal, and you are.
>> Well, I'm the Vice President, and he's
been extremely involved, so
>> at the outset, you're higher in the line
of succession. Yes, that's true.
>> So, again, the entire team has been
involved. I think the the reason that I
took a particular interest in this, and
why the President gave me a particular
set of responsibilities is, yeah, I do
care a lot about this particular issue.
Uh number two, there's there's always
just an element of, you know,
and I don't know fully the criteria the
President uses for these things, but
sometimes he says, "This person is the
right person for this job, this person
is the right person for that job." I
will say this thing in particular has
been sort of an all hands on deck thing.
So, I'm not trying to deflect
responsibility. I absolutely think this
is a good deal for the American people,
and I have been personally working very
hard on it, but the entire
administration has been working very
hard on it.
>> Last question then. What is your message
to the part of the Republican Party
that
is really afraid that this deal is a big
sellout, and seems preemptively eager to
blame you for it?
Meaning,
>> [snorts]
>> imagine anyone from Lindsey Graham to
Ted Cruz to Mark Levin,
um and beyond.
>> Well, first of all, what I'd say is, I
actually think criticism and dynamism
and disagreement within a party is a
good thing. You know, I don't know
exactly how many people voted for Donald
Trump for president. It's I think 75, 80
a lot of million people. And those
people are going to have a difference of
opinion on a whole host of issues. I
like the back and forth, so I think it's
a good thing. Number two, just to
address their substantive concerns,
they will see this.
I think they should have some faith in
the president who has kept his promises
on this particular issue and a lot of
others that we don't give anything.
Again, it's a dial. We turn the dial up
as they turn the dial up. And what does
turning the dial up mean for them? It
means transforming their relationship
with the United States, with the region,
with Israel, with everybody, okay?
That's the second thing that I'd say.
And the third thing that I'd say is,
you know, we're in the business of
solving real problems, not solving
abstract problems. And so, if your view
is that opening of the straits, getting
them to commit to the destruction of the
enriched uranium, and any other number
of of potential benefits that will come
along with this deal, it's not just
whether this is good or bad, it's what
is the alternative? What do you want to
do? If your proposal is to send 200,000
ground troops into Tehran so that you
can make Reza Pahlavi the leader of that
country, then say that. But I don't I
don't appreciate criticism without
alternatives. I'm in the business every
single day where I'm trying to solve
problems. If you think this is a bad
deal, what is your alternative? We could
drop more bombs. We could destroy more
of their country. We could kill the
current iteration of their leadership.
We know where all of them are. All of
those things could happen, but does that
make the American people safer or more
prosperous? The president of the United
States and I think no. We think that
this deal is what makes the American
people safer and more prosperous.
>> All right.
J.D. Vance, if you play your cards
right, maybe we'll have you back again
in the future. But for now, thank you
for [music] joining me.
>> Appreciate it.
>> Hey.
>> [music]